[ Music ]
>> Regina Meredith: Millions
of dollars a year are spent
on readings with psychics
and readers of all stripes,
yet according to Paul O'Brien
we all have the ability
to access information
from the unseen realms.
The most direct path is through
the use of divination tools.
This includes astrology,
numerology, tarot, I Ching,
and other methods of accessing
unconscious information,
often being directed
by our spirit or soul.
Paul was so intrigued
with divination
that he began exploring its
interface with technology
and became the father of
interactive divination.
Oh boy, in a big way.
Anyone who's heard of
Tarot.com, you're the daddy.
>> Paul O'Brien: Well, it all
started with I Ching software
and ended being, coming the
largest astrology website.
>> Regina Meredith: Yeah,
I think most, probably most
of our viewers, even back
to AOL when you were dealing
with Rick Levine, who
is a friend of yours,
and his astrology and other
tools were all made available
on a daily basis on AOL.
And you were really instrumental
in that partnership.
>> Paul O'Brien: Right.
AOL was one of our big partners.
We also partnered with
Google and MySpace,
and it basically led to
millions of people having access
to these authentic forms
of classical divination
via the internet.
>> Regina Meredith: I know,
which is amazing because,
now if I hadn't known of
this and I were listening
for the first time, I would
say, "How is that possible?
" And we're going to get into
it, because this whole thing
about the human field and
technology interfacing
with each other, I think
a lot of people would say,
"Oh how can it possibly work?"
But I've played with this
app that you've created,
the I Ching app,
and it does work,
and we'll show that
in a little bit.
First of all I thought we'd
just start with a primer course
on divination in
this conversation.
Let's talk about
what divination is.
>>PO: Well, divination is a way
of stimulating the intuition
to think about problems that
logic can't handle or to deal
with questions that go
beyond the realm of logic
to help us think
outside the box.
And this can take various forms.
So the technology
that you use in order
to deliver a divination
experience is secondary
to the fact that
what you're trying
to do is stimulate the intuition
using archetypes in order
to answer questions
that logic can't handle.
>>RM: And it's not like
this is a new phenomenon.
Let's talk a little bit about
some of the original forms of --
I mean, we've heard
of water witches
and even my father hired a
dousing expert to find his well
on his property, which they
found the first time out.
I didn't find that
out for many years,
because I didn't think he
believed in any of that.
And I was talking to him about
dousing one day and he said,
"Well, that's how we found
water on the property.
So this is probably the
most commonly-known one,
but throughout the
ages how did it start?
What were the tools,
and what were the uses?
>>PO: Well, I don't know a
whole lot about divining rods,
and finding water
with divining rods,
but divination systems have been
around for thousands of years.
It goes back a long time.
Probably the oldest system,
and that's all I'm
really conversant with,
are the classical systems.
The oldest system is the
I Ching, and that's been
around three or four
thousand years.
We're not exactly
sure how old that is.
Tarot cards have been around
a thousand years perhaps,
used for divination
maybe 500 years.
Runes have been around
for a thousand years,
maybe used for divination
for a few hundred years.
And astrology, of course, nobody
knows how old astrology is.
It goes back to the Middle East,
to the Chaldean Sumerian Empires
that almost predate history.
So we've been looking for ways
to read the signs and omens
of nature and of the
times for a long time,
because we've had
this need to try
to understand how
things work in our lives.
>>RM: To go beyond the
time-space continuum,
because it's often
very much, not always,
but it's often future-related.
And this has been a common,
commonly used modality
for getting information,
even militarily
in strategic situations
in the military,
throughout the ages,
across the globe.
These have been used
for military advantage.
Presidents, kings, leaders,
despots have often consulted
with these various
experts in these fields.
It's more common than not
from my understanding.
>>PO: Right.
Every culture, every religion
has incorporated some form
of divination or some
form of seeking answers
through the intercession
of some oracle or another.
There's the Oracle at Delphi,
and of course everybody wants
to know what the future brings.
Now, I can't promise you
that, but there's a lot more
to divination than
that in the sense
that we can understand patterns,
we can get a sense of the timing
of things, and of course they
say that timing is everything.
And a lot of times when
these military leaders
and Alexander the Great would
go see the Oracle at Delphi,
they didn't get so much a
prediction as kind of a riddle
or some indication
of an advisory as to
when to make the right
move at the right time.
So this has been a universal
desire up to this day.
It's been going on for
thousands of years.
>>RM: It can give you --
it seems to me what
it's really good
at is showing you the dynamic
in play at the moment; although,
you can also go into
the future with that.
>>PO: Right.
You can see the trend lines
and you can get a sense
of the way the wind is blowing
based on the way things are now.
>>RM: So let's talk about you.
How did this happen?
When did you first start playing
around with divination tools?
And I know the I Ching
is really your thing.
You just love that.
You've invested many
years in it.
And then let's talk about
the other side of your life.
Tell us the story, because it's
really fun and interesting.
>>PO: Well, a long time ago
in a galaxy far, far away,
I was an undergraduate at UC
Berkley, and I was introduced
to this system, the I
Ching, by this young lady
who I was really more
interested in than any kind
of fortune telling game that
she might be showing me.
But I played along with it,
and she thought I would
think this was really cool
and so she showed me how
she used it and she asked me
to think of a question
that I needed some
guidance on or some issue.
And so I wrote something down
and it didn't mean
anything to me.
I was --
>>RM: Probably thinking of her.
>>PO: I was thinking of her
and I was kind of a young,
cocky male and I was being a
little bit of a smart aleck,
and I was kind of internally
making fun of the whole thing.
And so she has me
toss these coins
and she records the pattern.
And traditionally when
you do the I Ching,
you cast three coins six times.
And then she would draw the six
lines, and then she looked it
up in this big book she had, and
she opened it to the hexagram
that my pattern indicated.
Well, it turned out
that the hexagram I got
that first time was
entitled "youthful folly."
And the theme of the
hexagram was that the student,
the young immature student
lacks respect for the teacher.
>>RM: Oh, interesting.
>>PO: But in this case,
the teacher being
the I Ching itself,
the ancient sage that's
speaking through this oracle.
And I thought "Oh, wow."
It didn't even consider
my question
which really wasn't
a real question.
>>RM: You didn't have a
legitimate question anyway.
>>PO: Yeah, and it kind
of reflected back at me.
I was making fun of it
and it made fun of me.
I thought, "Oh, that's
interesting.
Let's do this again."
Now, this time my attitude
was a little bit different.
Not more respectful, but this
time instead of making fun
of it, I was testing it.
So I wrote down some
other question
that didn't mean anything to me
and I cast the coins
six times...
>>RM: Slow learner.
>>PO: ...and it comes back with
a hexagram where the text --
I'll never forget
-- the text said
"questioning the
sincerity of the speaker."
"Oh my god, it's testing me."
So I make fun of it,
it makes fun of me.
I test it, it tests me.
And then I realized
how this thing works.
It reflects your energy
and your intention.
As much as anything
else, it's a mirror.
And that was my first
introduction
to divination systems, and since
that time there have been
very few big decisions
that I have been
faced with in my life
where I haven't consulted the
I Ching and gotten some input
from it as one of the
sources of advisement.
And then I also became
familiar with astrology,
which back in the day started
becoming popular in the '70s.
Tarot cards started
I didn't really get
into that until later,
but I kind of understood.
These things have a common base.
They kind of all operate
on the same principles.
>>RM: That's one
thing I noticed.
It doesn't seem to
matter which system,
even some of the lesser-known
like human design or whatnot,
they all tend to overlay
and reflect back the same
characteristics, traits,
principles, timing or whatnot.
>>PO: Right.
So you just have to have a
different set of archetypes.
You can take a tarot
deck, you've got 78 cards.
You take an I Ching system,
you've got 64 hexagrams.
In numerology, they've
got 22 numbers.
Some people take that up to 99.
So... each one of these
things is called an archetype
or a representative
of an archetype,
which is a quality of energy.
So you can divvy up the world
into four types of things:
air, water, fire, earth.
Or you can divvy it up
into 12 or whatever.
So you have a set of archetypes.
The larger the set of
archetypes, the more specific
and more precise the
system is going to be.
>>RM: That makes sense.
>>PO: So in astrology
you've got tons of stuff.
You've got the planets.
You've got the houses.
You've got the signs.
That's a very, very
complex system.
You need a computer
for astrology.
>>RM: Right.
But you had another part of
your life going on because you,
at Berkley it wasn't really
holding your attention all
that well, right?
>>PO: Right.
>>RM: And so you booked on
down the road and you ended
up very intrigued with the
budding field of technology
when the computer
was what, $150,000
and filled up an entire room?
>>PO: That's right.
>>RM: A miniature version.
>>PO: It was in the early
'70s, and I had a friend
who had a job at
a computer center.
Jeez, what is that?
He made software.
What's that?
And so he would take me there
at night because he had the keys
to the place and it was a
computer that would take
up this whole entire room.
They had less power than
my iPhone does today.
And it was like a
$150,000 machine.
And we would go in there late
at night when nobody else was
around and there was one
little screen the size
of an oscilloscope and he
had hooked up these joysticks
and we would play this game.
And we would play
this game for hours.
Now, Regina, I'm not
really a computer gamer.
I've never been much
of a computer gamer,
but I was so fascinated by
that, because I saw that some
of these guys at MIT, which is
where this program had been
developed, had written some code
and through the agency of
this code that they wrote,
they delivered this interactive
experience which happened
to be a game called Space War,
and it was too little
spaceships.
But that wasn't really
what excited me.
It wasn't the game per
se, it was the concept
that you could write code
and deliver an experience.
And I thought "Wow, there's so
much potential in this field.
And I started having
visions of multimedia.
Now, was is back
in the early '70s
and CD-ROMs were 20 years off.
And I didn't know how
it was going to happen.
But the idea that you
could deliver an experience
and that it could have graphics
and sounds, that just took me
by surprise and I was
totally fascinated with that.
>>RM: And at that time there
was really nothing else to look
to that had been developed.
It hadn't been developed yet.
>>PO: That's right,
that's right.
There was everything
super high-tech.
>>RM: Okay, so this was
a bona fide download.
>>PO: Right, but I did
everything I could to get
into the computer software field
because I was a college dropout,
and the one skill that I
had was the ability to type.
So I could type 65
words a minute,
and I did everything
I could to get a job
at that computer center.
I finally landed a
job as a secretary
and I started my
career in software.
>>RM: I love it.
>>PO: Yeah, it's a
pretty good story.
15 years later I was the
Vice President of Marketing
for a high-tech software
company,
and I found myself using the
I Ching more often than usual.
Now, why? Well, in this
particular company it was
so dysfunctional and the
office politics were brutal.
And the guy who ran it
was an engineer by trade
and he didn't really know
how to manage people.
It was just a horrible
culture, yet there weren't
that many software marketing
executive positions in Portland
where I lived at the time.
I didn't really want to leave,
so I was using the I Ching
to try to keep my balance.
And this is something that
divination can help us do.
Because in a good set of
archetypes you're going
to have some that are very
pleasant, like the ones we got
on the I Ching app today.
But some of them are pleasant
and really delightful.
And then there are some
that basically counsel you
to maybe wait a little while,
get a little introspective.
And then there are others
that are kind of scary
or they're reflecting
some shadow stuff.
And there are cards of
tarot, like the death card,
and people misunderstand that
and they think it
literally means death.
No, it just means that
something's coming to an end
and that something's
going to be reborn.
But in any case, a good system
of archetypes is not going
to just have all warm fuzzies.
And so it helps us make a
decision because there's a time
to assert ourselves and
there's a time to run like hell.
And there's a time to do nothing
and let the dark clouds pass.
So divination systems have this
knowledge, this wisdom built
into them and they can help
us calibrate our reactions
and our responses to
the things around us.
And that's what I was
using the I Ching for in
that office environment.
>>RM: Just trying to survive
it and continue on your path.
>>PO: Yeah, because there were
so many slings and arrows,
there was so much back-biting,
there was just stuff flying
around that was beyond the
ability of my mind to understand
or logically figure out
what's the best thing to do.
So I was sort of like
stimulating my intuition
and taking it from there.
And that's when I got the idea
of inventing divination
software, of the intersection
between technology and
divination systems.
And I thought, "Why couldn't
I do this on the computer?'
And I remembered back to those
original visions that I had.
In 1989, you know, here
I was using a Macintosh,
and this was a graphical
computer.
It was the first
graphical computer.
And so the idea of
putting sounds
and images on it made sense.
And yet, there was no
multimedia software at the time
because CD-ROMs hadn't
been invented yet.
But I was just so
captivated by the idea
that I took my life savings
and I hired a programmer
and an artist and actually
created what turned
out to be one of the
first multimedia titles,
as well as the first
divination software,
by creating this I Ching
software on two floppy discs,
so you had to put one
in and take it out
and put the other one in.
You got a little
bit of graphics...
>>RM: Seems like
that was forever ago.
>>PO: It was very
primitive, but it was sweet.
>>RM: Now, this had to have
been what, the '90s, early --
>>PO: 1989.
>>RM: The early, okay.
So...
>>PO: So that's why
I'm known as the father
of interactive divination...
>>RM: That was a long time ago.
>>PO: because I invented
the genre.
I didn't know it.
It was Monte Farber that
called me the father
of interactive divination
10 years later.
But he says "Whoa, you were
the first one to ever?"
I said, "Yeah."
And he goes "Well,
you're the father
of interactive divination."
I said "Oh, I never
thought of it that way."
He says, we should
tell your PR people.
And I said, I don't
have any PR people.
He said, "Well, you should
get some and tell them."
>>RM: "Get some and tell
them," and you have,
and people like me
are now starting it.
Okay. You then, how long
was it before you were able
to actually create a
really workable system
that the public could access?
What year...
>>PO: It took about a
year, and I kept my job.
I kept doing consulting
for the company
because when I threatened
to quit,
it kind of woke the guy up.
And basically the Board of
Directors called me in and said,
"We don't want you to quit.
What's it going to
take for you to stay?"
So I said, "Can I sleep on it?"
I came back the next day, and
I cast the I Ching that night,
and it helped me formulate -- I
said, "I think, you know what?
I'm going to ask for a 10
percent raise and all this stuff
that they're going to say no to,
because I want out
of here," right?
So I go back and I showed
them my offer and they said,
"Okay, let's talk about it.?
And then they called me in,
they said, "We don't want
to give you a 10 percent raise."
And I thought "Oh, okay."
And they said, "We want to
give you a 20 percent raise."
And I said, "Oh, really?"
And they said, "Yeah, because
we want you to be happy
and we want you to stay."
And I said "Well, I can't be
bought, but I can be rented."
So I stayed for another...
six months.
And during that time I
developed the I Ching,
but I had a problem.
The problem was that I had about
10 versions of it in book form.
There's about 30 versions
out there right now.
And I had 10 of them because
I really was devoted to it.
It had become my teacher
since I was a teenager and --
but I didn't have
the rights to any
of those in terms of the text.
So my software needed
text, so that inspired me
to write my own version
of the I Ching.
And I never published
it as a book.
It always was embedded in the
software, but I wanted a version
that was not sexist and not
militaristic and more modern
and a little bit
more lighthearted
and accessible for people.
So it took about a year
to do the whole thing
and put it all together.
And at that point I
thought, "God, this is cool."
I never even considered all
the rational things about,
is there a market?
In 1989, there was no market.
People who knew what the I
Ching was didn't buy software.
>>RM: Uh huh, they had
their book and coins.
>>PO: They didn't
even like computers.
>>RM: Right.
>>PO: And people who bought
software didn't even know what
the I Ching was.
So I had a better
mousetrap that nobody wanted,
but I started the company
anyway because I had
so much passion for it.
I was just doing something I
loved based on two fascinations,
based on the intersection
of two fascinations
that I had discovered
when I was young.
So I did it anyway.
>>RM: That's a totally
blessed life, really.
I mean, most people
live their entire lives
and don't find what it
is they truly want to do
with their time,
energy and devotion.
And you found both
of them early on.
And you had an incredibly
successful go of it.
I mean, you had some bumps along
the way, but once you got going,
an incredibly successful
go of it.
And --
>>PO: Well, it wasn't
that smooth.
>>RM: No, I know,
there were some bumps.
>>PO: I mean, I went bankrupt.
I mean, the company
went bankrupt.
>>RM: I know.
You had some bumps, but
you did okay in the end.
>>PO: But then I
picked it back up again.
>>RM: You did.
But again, you were guiding
yourself or allowing yourself
to be guided through the
use of the very tools
that you were offering people.
>>PO: I was trusting
my intuition.
>>RM: How much of the total
really critical decision-making
that you made along your path
to great success was as a result
of your relationship with
the I Ching in particular?
>>PO: Well, I asked the I Ching
if I should make a software
version of the I Ching,
and I got the hexagram
breakthrough,
which was very encouraging.
But I never made
decisions based on what --
you know, and this is what I
have told people over the years
because I built Tarot.com
and we had a tarot,
we added astrology-numerology
to the original I Ching
that I started with, and
eventually took it all online,
and that's when things
really started to happen.
But I've always told people,
"You don't look to these things
to tell you what to do.
You look to these things to
support part of your brain,
to support your right brain,
to support your intuition,
because at the end of the
day you are responsible
for the decisions
that you make."
>>RM: You have to
take right action.
>>PO: Right.
And you can't push it
off on somebody else.
And this is one of the issues
I have with the way a lot
of people use psychics.
And I'm not against psychics.
Some people are gifted at
the intuitive function,
more gifted than
the average person.
But my mission in
creating the software
and in creating the web site was
to empower the average person
to tap into their
own psychic ability,
to stimulate their own intuition
and to become more intuitive
on their own and
take responsibility
for their own decisions,
rather than delegating
their decision-making
to somebody else.
>>RM: Yes, I totally understand.
>>PO: And this is a big
theme of mine because a lot
of people misuse these tools
because they don't want
to make a decision,
or they go to somebody
and pay them a hundred bucks
and then they feel obligated
to believe what they told them
because you don't want to feel
like you just wasted
a hundred bucks.
>>RM: Right, that's true.
>>PO: So it is a high
suggestibility factor
when you do that.
And the same thing could be
true of a divination system,
but there's nobody
in the middle.
There's no middle man.
So the whole Zeitgeist of it for
me was this Aquarian Age concept
that we don't need a middle man.
We can go direct.
We don't need a priest
and we don't need a guru
and we don't need a psychic.
These things might be helpful
if you manage them correctly
and you take responsibility
for your own decision-making.
But we have the ability
to go direct, and I wanted
to use technology to
empower people to do that.
But people have told me,
"How can you get a computer
involved with tarot cards?
I mean, I like to
feel the deck."
It's the same thing people
say now about eBook readers.
You know, "I want to feel
the book," and I say, "Well,
you know, cardboard's
a technology."
Dead trees are technology.
Toxic ink is a technology.
It's just a different
-- you prefer cardboard,
you think that cardboard is
a good conductor of energy.
Now, I understand people
like to play with the cards
and there's a social
aspect to tarot.
I have no problem with that.
>>RM: Well, there's
lore around it.
You have to put your energy
into the cards and so forth.
>>PO: Right, and I'm not
thinking that the cardboard is
that great a conductor.
[Laughter] Maybe if you
used platinum cards.
>>RM: Right.
Yeah, point well made.
Let's talk about the actual
use of it and what is going on,
because one thing I've noticed,
it's like, you know, daisies.
He loves me, he loves me not.
Is that --
>>PO: That's a good
divination system, huh?
>>RM: Well, it's a
primitive one anyway.
But it seems that
the mindset you go
in with has everything
to do with results.
When you go in with
fear and desperation --
let's talk about that --
versus non-attachment.
And take some time on that,
because this is a big point.
>>PO: Right.
You know, one of the things
that is a huge benefit
of using a divination
system or of even going
to a counselor is getting
clear on what your dilemma is
or what your desire is.
It's knowing what you want.
The minute that you put
something down on paper,
like even just writing the
question for an I Ching reading,
or formulating your
dilemma for a tarot reading,
just that act alone
gives you a little bit
of distance from the problem.
Here's me; here's the issue.
>>RM: You even have that on the
app itself where you can type in
and be very clear about
what you're asking.
>>PO: Right.
And that's to help you
stay focused on this rather
than be caught up in
your feelings about it.
So in other words, you want to
get a little bit of distance.
You want to get less attached.
And then I always
counsel people to start
with a little affirmation
or meditation or prayer,
something like, "May I
open my mind to the truth.
May I only care about learning
what's true in this situation.
May I let go of my desire
for any particular answer
or any particular outcome."
So it's kind of a
non-attachment meditation.
That alone really helps a lot.
The problem that
we normally have is
that we have an emotional
reaction
to something that's bothering
us or something happens
and we don't understand.
"Why did that happen?"
And people go why, why, why?
Sometimes we're not meant
to know why right away,
but we want to know why
because we're afraid
that it's going to
spiral downhill.
And so we have these
fear feelings,
and those feelings give rise
to more catastrophic thinking,
which gives rise to more
fear until we're exhausted
and we want to just
give our power away,
and we want to go
pay a hundred bucks
and tell somebody,
"Fix this for me."
>>RM: Right, "Tell
me what to do."
>>PO: Right, and so it really
behooves us to get more of a...
non-attached relationship
to our thinking
and then our feelings have
a chance to simmer down.
And then we can get
into the mind space
where we're receptive,
where we're receptive
to good advice or, we're
receptive to inspiration,
or we're receptive
to signals that want
to come to our intuition.
And that's not so easy.
When we're wrapped up and
emotionally involved...
>>RM: It's not easy.
>>PO: When we're in
an emotional reaction,
that is the worst time
to make a decision.
I created this rule.
I call it O'Brien's
rule, which is actually
in the next book I'm writing,
which is Great Decisions,
Perfect Timing.
It's about decision-making.
It's about the function
of divination.
And the rule is, the
stronger the emotion,
the less you can trust it.
>>RM: Absolutely.
I mean, in my mind's eye I
can see someone sitting there
with a broken heart and a quart
of ice cream shaking the app
like crazy trying to --
you're not going to get
truthful information
under those conditions.
>>PO: You know, I knew somebody
who was, she was a singer,
an opera singer, and a prima
donna of the nth degree.
Do you know the expression
drama queen, right?
histrionic personality disorder?
Well, in any case, I
said to her, "Maria --
" that's not her real name --
"Maria, the strength of the
feeling does not correlate
with the accuracy of
your interpretation.
The stronger the feeling,
the less you can trust it."
I said, "Just because you
feel something really strongly
doesn't make it true.
It doesn't make it a
good basis for action."
And this came as a shock to her.
It really was a surprising
thing.
She actually stopped
and thought about it.
>>RM: Because her
whole lens was drama.
>>PO: Right, exactly.
So we want to get --
we want to develop more
of a non-attached relationship
to our thoughts and feelings.
This is what meditation
practice helps us do,
and I think of divination
actually as a type
of meditation practice.
You know, they say that
meditation is listening to God.
They say that prayer
is talking to God.
Divination is kind
of a two-way channel.
To do a tarot card
reading or I Ching reading,
you're basically putting
some query out there
and you're getting
some information back.
You're accessing the universal
consciousness, and then by dent
of the cards that turn up or
the hexagram that you get,
you're getting some
information back.
So it's kind of a
two-way form of prayer.
>>RM: So if you do it in that
way, you take the responsibility
to distance yourself a bit,
be clear on the question
or the situation that you're
talking about, in that sense,
then, you have to be
also brave enough to look
at the cards for what they say.
And as you say, some of
them are "Run like hell."
>>PO: Right.
>>RM: Yeah.
And some of them are -- no
matter how eager you are,
no matter if they're saying,
"We need an answer tomorrow,"
and the cards say wait...
>>PO: Yeah.
And that's one of
the things I love
about a good divination system,
rather than one that's full
of warm fuzzies, and
there are decks like that.
There's so many decks that
people are inventing every year
and some of them don't have
a balanced set of archetypes
because every single one of them
is what I call a warm fuzzy.
With a good divination set
of archetypes, like tarot
or I Ching, you've got
some of these shadow cards
so those can reflect the whole
picture and give you kind
of a more objective thing,
and sometimes you
don't want to see it.
Sometimes you don't
want to hear it.
But a good divination system
doesn't really give a darn
about your ego or about
your ego's agenda.
It's basically about reflecting
the energies that you're
in the middle of, both
inside yourself and outside
of yourself, in a
more objective way.
And that's the reason, that's
the best reason to do it,
is not to reinforce -- you know,
we had so many people,
at Tarot.com,
we had customers that were
just using it all the time,
and I was conflicted.
As a businessman I loved it.
It was just more business.
But as somebody who cares
about people I thought,
"Wait a minute, you're
using this too much."
We had to cut some people off,
basically because they were
spending too much money,
which was a hard thing
for a businessman to do.
But they were doing it to just
-- any little decision they had
to make or whatever, they
were using it to justify
and they just kept doing it
until they got the
answer they wanted.
>>RM: Yes, exactly.
>>PO: So it really wasn't
doing what it was intended
to do for them.
>>RM: When you were talking
about going into the psyche
on a deeper level, Carl
Jung was very conversant
and had great respect
for divination.
Maybe you can talk, lay that
foundation for us a bit.
>>PO: Well, he became
fascinated by the I Ching,
and he also studied
astrology and tarot.
And more than anybody, he
defined how these things work.
And I talk about this
in all of my books,
but the book Divination: Sacred
Tools for Reading the Mind
of God, which is right here,
that talks about Carl Jung's
research and the principles
that he came up with,
and so does --
The Visionary I Ching has some
introductory chapters on that,
and that's an eBook or an app.
And then the new book I'm
writing, Great Decisions,
it's all about -- I'd say
that my mission in life is
to understand and explain
the more esoteric discoveries
of Carl Jung and help people
learn how to leverage them.
Okay, it's one thing to
know about synchronicity
and archetypes and the
collective unconscious.
It's another thing to know
that you can actually
use these things.
That's kind of a step
beyond where Carl Jung went,
but a lot of the stuff
in the New Age movement
is related to that.
So speaking of divination,
he came up with these
ideas called synchronicity,
the synchronicity
principle, archetypes,
and the collective unconscious.
And the way they really
define how these things work.
The archetypes I
mentioned earlier.
You know, you've got
78 archetypes in tarot.
Each card represents a
different quality of energy,
a different human
dynamic, a different aspect
of the personality, a
different way things can go.
That's archetypes.
It's a power -- these
are universal, too.
He studied different cultures
and different religions
and different sets of
mythologies and people's dreams
from cultures all
over the world.
And he found that symbols, that
there are symbols that come
up in dreams and in
mythology that are universal,
that are cross-cultural.
And so he came up
with the concept
of the collective unconscious.
That we all share in this
resource or all have access
to this resource where
these things live,
and that we can go there and
the tool that helps us tune
in is the intuition,
the sixth sense.
Synchronicity principle states
that everything is connected
to everything else, and
in time as well as in space.
Now, in physics, in subatomic
physics, they've proven
that everything is connected to
everything else; but in science,
in Western science, we don't
consider the dimension of time.
You know, it's assumed that
if you do this experiment
on Tuesday morning and you do
that same controlled experiment
in the middle of the night
on Sunday, you're going
to get exactly the same result.
The timing is not going
to affect anything.
And that's maybe true
in the limited sphere
of physical matter, which is
what science usually is paying
attention to.
But the ancient sages,
they were interested
in a different kind of question.
They were specifically
interested in,
how do things go
together in time?
Which is related to every
timing question that there is.
It's related to, "When
should I get married,"
or "make my next move
in this negotiation?"
Or there's all kinds of issues
that are related to timing
and social issues
and political issues
that are related
to that question.
So the synchronicity principle
says that everything is related
to everything else
that's happening
at the same moment in time.
So that if you look at a
map of a moment in time,
which is really what the
horoscope wheel is --
that's a snapshot from the
place you were born looking
at the sky.
It's a 180-degree round
circle snapshot of the sky
at that moment, if you
could see the planets.
Because obviously in the
daytime you can't see them.
But that's what --
that astrology chart actually
is an astronomical photograph
of the sky at a moment in time
from a particular place in time.
You can take that mapping
and you can read it,
if you know how, and that's
what astrology is all about.
If you do an I Ching
reading, boom:
the way the coins
land is related
to everything else
that's happening
at that moment or
during that time.
And if you're focused on a
question, if you're meditating,
like I was saying before,
if you have defined an issue
or a question or a dilemma,
and you stay meditating
on that while you cast
the coins, you're going
to get a pattern
that presumably,
according to the
synchronicity principle,
is related to what you
were thinking about,
since you were the
one casting the coins.
Same thing with the cards:
the cards that you pull
when you're focused -- if you're
not focused, you're just going
to kind of get a
general reflection.
There's nothing wrong with that.
A lot of people use tarot
cards just to meditate.
They'll pull a card every day,
or they'll cast the I
Ching every day just
to give themselves
something to think about,
because every single one
of those 78 archetypes is
inside of you all the time.
It's just which one needs
to be called up now?
So if you have a question, you
can use a divination system
to call up archetypes
that are going
to give you a message
that's going
to help you deal
with that dilemma.
So Carl Jung, he explained
it all with synchronicity
and archetypes and the
collective unconscious.
And I'm going -- what
I'm doing is I'm trying
to help people learn how to use
synchronicity and archetypes
to make better decisions,
whether they use
divination or not.
So in my new book, which is
coming out in six months,
Great Decisions, Perfect Timing,
I've got about seven pillars
of visionary decision making
and divination is one of them.
But you don't have to use it.
There are other things
you can do,
but that's another conversation.
>>RM: Yes, it is.
When the book is released, we'll
come back and do this again.
But there's another
area that gets,
I think is muddied all the
time and that has to do
with an egoic desire
or an immature desire
versus the soul's desire.
And a lot of times people
cannot separate which one it is.
So let's talk about
that for a bit:
how you get into more alignment
with the soul's desire than kind
of a quick fix of the ego.
>>PO: Right.
Well, I think it has a lot to do
with developing the intuition,
and that's what divination
helps,
is one tool for helping
us to do.
The ego basically operates from
a delusionary point of view.
The egocentric point of view
kind of goes like this: "Okay,
rationally I know I'm not
the center of the universe.
But I might as well be,
as far as I'm concerned."
So we put so much stock and we
take everything so personally
because of that attitude.
It's kind of hard -- I'm not
trying to put anybody down,
this is the human condition.
This is what we're here
to learn how to overcome.
And so the egocentric
point of view is going
to take a very small-minded
approach to things.
We can get beyond that
by using the sixth sense,
which is what they've called the
intuition for a thousand years,
and the sixth sense can
get us out of our own way
and can get us out of
our mind and help us tap
into that collective
unconscious and help us tap
into the spiritual realm or the
realm of infinite intelligence
or whatever we want to call it.
This has been written up
in so many different ways.
Napolean Hill called it
infinite intelligence.
Ralph Waldo Emerson
called it infinite mind,
or there were all these
things it was called.
And we can tap into that, but
we can't tap into that as long
as we're trying to
defend ourselves,
as long as we're trying to
protect what we think we have
or what we think we're entitled
to, which is the ego's job.
So I think the ego
is very important,
but it's not meant
to run the show.
It's a lieutenant,
not a general.
The ego deals in the dualistic
realm, the realm of subject
and object, and it gets
things done and it takes care
of business and it pays
the bills and it's a very,
very important part
of who we are.
It's a functional
part of who we are.
It's only when it usurps power
and when we give power to it
that it starts causing
all kinds of problems.
And it basically kind of goes
like this: the ego says, "Well,
it's a dangerous world,
and people are trying
to take advantage of you,
and there's a lot of things
to be afraid of or
feel guilty about,
but I'm going to
take care of it.
Trust me, I'm going
to control things.
I'm going to get things
under control and I'm going
to take care of it," When really
it's the ego that's making us
afraid and guilty to begin with.
So it's kind of a scam.
>>RM: Yeah, definitely.
>>PO: Now, the intuition is
the way to get out of that,
but it's pretty hard to get
out of the intuition
if you're stirred up.
And we were talking
about that earlier.
If you're in a state
of emotional reaction,
which you're going to be
if you're defensive --
you know, the ego's function
is to defend the boundaries.
Okay, that's good.
That's useful.
We need to do that sometimes.
Sometimes it's very important.
Sometimes the subject's got
to defend against the object
because the object's
attacking it or whatever.
There are dangers in life and
the ego defends the boundaries.
But if you want to
grow and expand
and start manifesting
things creatively,
you've got to be able
to transcend that,
and that's where the sixth
sense, the intuition, comes in.
The problem is that
the intuitive sense,
the sixth sense, is so much more
delicate than the other five.
>>RM: Exactly.
Exactly.
>>PO: I like to use the
analogy -- okay, here's my hand.
Let's say the palm of
my hand is the mind
and these five fingers are
antennae, huge antennae.
They're the five senses,
especially the visual one.
You know, the visual cortex
takes up half your brain.
I mean, it's powerful.
So we're getting
all these signals
from the five senses
all the time,
and then we've got
the clattering of --
the internal clattering
of the mind itself.
Okay, that's a lot
of noise going on.
Then there's this tiny,
dinky little sixth
antenna that's calibrated
to a very subtle fine signal,
and it's easily drowned
out by all this noise.
So that's why we've got
to get some detachment.
We've got to get
some non-attachment.
We've got, we need some help,
whether we use meditation
or whether we use divination or
whether we channel archetypes,
we've got to clear
the channel for this.
And that's what I think you were
referring to by the spirit realm
and getting in touch with that.
And when we can do that, then
the ego gets calibrated to that.
So if the ego's calling the
shots, we have a problem.
But if the ego can
start taking direction
from the spiritual
self, which is...
aided and abetted by
listening to this antenna,
then everything's going
to work really well.
>>RM: Most people don't have
an experience yet, though,
of knowing that it's
going to be okay.
Your intuition, your being is
perfectly equipped to make sure
that everything goes
just as it needs to.
And without that -- I mean,
people who are very
strongly based in any
of the world's religions
maybe have more of that going
in saying, "No, I've just
turned it over to God.
Everything's going to be okay.
I just wait for my
instruction, my knowingness
to happen through God."
And so it's put in
a religious context.
It's taking the burden
off the ego.
But for the average person,
how do you go from the one
who doesn't have, say,
a traditional background
in religion and faith to
developing faith in self enough
where you can relax and quiet
down the other five senses?
>>PO: Right.
There's a lot of good
things in religion.
practices in all the religions,
and they all share a
lot of common things.
Where I have a problem
with religion is
when it infantilizes people.
So in other words, I
think it's very important
to develop a strong ego.
I'm not going to talk
down about the ego.
The only problem is when the
ego is controlling things.
I think it's very important
to have a strong ego,
because how can you
really let go of an ego
if you haven't developed it yet?
How can you let go of something
you don't have a hold of?
I think it's important to
go through the whole cycle.
You've got to leave the
Garden of Eden and you've got
to start making decisions
for yourself.
So if I was to use
religious terminology,
I'd say that God wants you to
be a grown-up and God wants you
to co-create with the divine
intelligence, not to be just
like a child and do
what you're told.
Who's telling you anyway?
It's some priest or
minister or some middle man.
>>RM: But on the planet that's
kind of what the dilemma is.
You have people who have no
faith in anything and thus live
by fear and ego, and you
have this faith, as you say,
that's somewhat immature.
>>PO: Right, exactly.
>>RM: And so you want to find
that really perfect middle zone.
I mean, the ego, the ego
is an aspect of self.
When you take it with the big
E, it is the sum of everything
that we have created and
expresses itself outward.
I mean, that is part of the ego.
And so I understand
what you're saying.
But the negative part of ego,
which is the fearful part
that is trying to take
control and squeezing
out any other input, that
little place in there,
how do people come to
become comfortable there
to relax a little bit so they
can even look at the cards?
>>PO: Right, yeah.
I think faith is very important,
but I would define
faith differently
than it's commonly defined.
To me, faith is not
about your beliefs.
>>RM: No, not at all.
>>PO: To me, faith
is about confidence.
And confidence comes from
the Latin, "confideo."
"Fideo" means to believe,
and "con" means within,
so to "believe in yourself."
That's what confidence means.
So I think if you have
faith in your ability to tap
into the spiritual realm,
using your intuition,
and you have faith in
your own resourcefulness,
and you have faith in the
resources that are available
to you coming from the
spiritual realm, you don't have
to have it all figured out.
You don't have to -- it doesn't
really matter what you believe
just as long as you
believe in yourself.
In other words, in your own
-- and so that way you evolve
and that way you
become a better person,
you become a bigger person.
So it's what we're here
to do and it's not easy.
>>RM: Absolutely.
Well, I wanted to bring it
up because most people are
pinging off of one or the other.
>>PO: Right.
And most people don't
have a lot of confidence.
I don't think, as
far as beliefs go,
I don't think you should
believe in anything
that doesn't make sense to you.
But it might not make
-- logic is not enough.
It might make intuitive sense.
Like for instance, I
believe in reincarnation.
I can't prove it.
I don't want to have
an argument about it.
But I believe it because it
makes intuitive sense to me.
But that's just me.
Somebody else it might not
make intuitive sense to them,
but for the most part, people
who disbelieve it disbelieve it
because they're belief
system doesn't allow for it
or because their orthodoxy
has said "No, no, no."
They say the same thing about
divination and it's so ironic.
All of the major religions had
reincarnation, or I don't know
about Islam, but the others all
had reincarnation at some point
and then it got stamped
out by the orthodoxy.
Same thing as divination.
There was divination
in the Jewish religion.
There is divination
all through the Bible.
>>RM: I was going to ask
you that a little bit ago.
Mention a couple of places
where it's mentioned.
>>PO: Well, I don't have
the chapter and verse,
but in the book Divination,
I've got a whole appendix there,
every verse in the Bible
that mentions divination.
And God's more for
it than against it!
There's many more verses where
he's praising the astrologers
or the diviners or he's
actually asking them
to use the divination system.
The Jews had a divination
system called Urim and Thummim,
and it was kind of these dice --
we're not sure, but they were
these dice or runes or something
like that kept in the
breastplate of the high priest,
and if there was a
major decision --
and there's many verses in
the Bible where God says,
"Use the Urim and
Thummim to figure
out who the next general should
be," and stuff like that.
So he actually tells them to use
divination to make a decision.
And they cast lots, in the
New Testament they cast lots
to replace Judas with
another disciple.
Casting lots is a
form of divination.
Flipping a coin is a
But they cast lots, believing
that the way the lots landed
was the way God wanted them
to land; that's divination.
So there's, it's a real
interesting study that we went
through to isolate every verse
that mentions diviners,
prophets...
and astrology in the Bible.
And sure enough, in Leviticus
God's pretty ticked off
at the astrologers.
But who knows what point in
history that was and who --
and then there's a
lot of other cases
where He says, "Call them in."
And so it's very interesting.
>>RM: It is, and yet the
religion that had once accepted
that and espoused the use of it
then later came to condemn it,
and really we have been
living in the backlash of that
for the last several
hundred years,
where it became something
used by witches and kooks
and frauds and the like.
>>PO: Right, right,
because religion became
institutionalized,
it was politicized,
it was all about
controlling the people.
You know, even the
formation of the books
of the Bible is a case study
in the politics of religion.
You know, I went to
Catholic school for 13 years.
I was taught all about the Bible
and religion and, of course,
the Catholic Church is
just, it is the source
of all the Christian
sects, the Protestants,
etcetera, all came from that.
And so the way that --
but I never learned
in Catholic school,
and I took religion classes.
I had to. I never learned
about the history of the church
or the history of the Bible,
other than Jesus said "Peter,
you're my rock," and it's like
Jesus invented the church,
but really until 325 AD there
was no consolidated Roman
Catholic Church, and
there was no Bible
and those books got voted
on at the Council of Nicea
in the 300s, and there
was a lot of candidates
for different canons
in the Bible
that were actually destroyed
because they didn't
make the cut.
Like, for instance, Revelations.
The Revelations that
we have now,
the Revelations of John -- wow.
That is one crazy book.
I mean, nobody's ever been
able to really interpret it
until the 19th century, and kind
of this one fundamentalist
sect came
up with a way of
interpreting it,
which has been carried
forward in recent times
and that's why we have this
whole Left Behind series
of books which has got all
these horrible predictions
and so forth.
All these horrible predictions
of how your neighbors are going
to be left behind and
they're going to be --
Jesus is going to come
back as a raging warrior
in a fiery chariot and
he's going to smite people.
You know, that doesn't seem
in character for Jesus to me.
But the point I was trying to
make is that back in the day,
in the 300s, there was the
Apocalypse of Saint Peter,
and they chose the
Apocalypse of Saint John
over the Apocalypse
of Saint Peter.
The Apocalypse of Saint Peter
is a very different story.
In that one, at the end of
time, at the end of the world,
the people in heaven ask
God if He, they entreat God
to forgive the people in hell
so that we can all be together
in heaven and God says,
"Okay," and it's a happy ending.
And that's the one
they destroyed.
>>RM: That didn't make the cut
and where it seemed there might
be some need of the Church
that had to be met
in the selections
of what was going
to make the cut.
>>PO: It occurs to me --
>>RM: Certainly triumphed
over the needs of the people.
>>PO: Yeah, we don't really
know the, how that debate went.
But after it got destroyed, in
fact, nobody knew it existed
until it turned up in
some of these scrolls
that they found in Egypt.
I don't know if it was the Dead
Sea Scrolls or there was a bunch
of scrolls they found within
the last hundred years
and they found it.
And it's amazing.
>>RM: Indeed.
So let's get into some practical
parts of the divination now.
How does a person then
pose the question?
Just some really basics now
if people are intrigued enough
to pull out their old
tarot deck they got
for their birthday a couple
of years ago or whatnot.
Let's talk about that.
>>PO: Yeah, yeah.
I think that's a very
important question, Regina,
and I'm glad you brought
that up, because a lot
of times people will ask
the wrong kind of question.
And it's like I say: "You
wouldn't ask the plumber
for investment advice.
And you wouldn't ask
your investment advisor
for mechanical advice."
You've got to ask the
right kind of question
for the right kind of resource.
So when it comes to a divination
system like the I Ching
or tarot cards, you
want to phrase your --
you don't want to ask a
question that's asking for data,
like "Where should
I go to lunch,"
or "What's the meaning of life?"
You ask a question that's going
to give you some kind of advice
and some kind of
insight and maybe an idea
of the way things are headed.
And you don't want to ask a
question about what's going
to happen in the future because
that's another question asking
for data.
And you still have free will.
What's going to happen in the
future depends on what you do.
So what you're trying to do
is stimulate your intuition
to make a better decision
in the present moment.
So the typical kind of
question that I advise people
to use would be what's the best
approach to take vis-a-vis x?
It could be a person's name.
It could be my relationship.
It could be asking for a raise.
So what's the best approach
to take toward asking
for a raise right now?
And you might get a response
that says, "Don't go there."
Or you might get a
response that indicates --
it's not going to tell you
that flat out, but you have to,
then you have to
interpret the cards.
So the real -- or
the I Ching reading.
So the real power of a
divination reading is not
in the literal words
that it tells you.
It's the reading between
the lines filtered
by the question that you asked.
So if you ask an
inappropriate question,
you've got a filter that's
not going to work very well,
and you're liable to be misled
or misinterpret what
it's trying to tell you.
>>RM: What if you then
get the information,
you've asked it wisely, you've
taken a little distance from it,
and you don't like what it
says so you just reject it?
Or maybe you try
to throw the coins
or lay the cards out again.
Now, what is that doing to
your relationship with yourself
and your own intuitive forces?
>>PO: Well, I mean, that's okay.
You can do whatever you want.
It's going to reflect
back relative to the level
of your seriousness and
sincerity and your intention,
like my original
story indicated.
So if you don't take it
seriously, you're not going
to get a serious answer.
If you get an answer that you
don't like, my recommendation is
that you take a day or two
and just sort of like see if,
and play with it, toy with it.
Think about it.
>>RM: Take it seriously;
give it some gravitas.
>>PO: Yeah, sleep on it
and consider whether
there's an aspect of it
that you're not seeing clearly
because of your attachment
to what you wanted to hear.
>>RM: Because it seems that
if you're one of these people
that are tossing the coins every
few moments that ultimately,
that kind of connection
is really not going
to be enhanced...
>>PO: Yeah, it's not
going to be meaningful.
>>RM: It won't be
meaningful at all to you.
And you also say that at this
point in time, we really need
to have clearer and
better decision-making.
>>PO: Oh, more than ever, yeah.
Because we live in a chaotic,
increasingly chaotic world.
We've got so many
decisions to make.
We have to make more important
personal decisions in a year
than our grandparents probably
had to make in 10 years.
They didn't have the mobility.
They didn't have
all the information.
They didn't have the urgency,
and things didn't seem
to be changing as fast.
We have this accelerating rate
of change that's getting worse.
It's not going to slow down.
So we have to, we need all
the help that we can get
to make decisions, and
in fact in some areas --
and that's why we --
decision-making is so important.
That's why we reward politicians
and CEOs with so much power
and wealth to make them for us.
To make them for society because
it's such an important --
>>RM: Well, that's gotten
us somewhere, hasn't it?
>>PO: Well yeah, they're
not doing very good.
I think they should
be using the I Ching.
But, so decision-making
is incredibly important
and we're dealing with more,
with a faster rate of change
and more things that
can go wrong,
and there's more at stake.
The whole survival of the planet
is at stake on some levels.
So yeah, it's critically
important
that we learn how
to do this better.
>>RM: So it seems that makes
it much more efficient because,
as you say, these decisions are
coming at us by the moment now.
I mean, small decisions
to large.
>>PO: There's too
many choices, too.
>>RM: As you say, the
mobility and everything,
the chance to connect
and move around,
to make different
kinds of decisions.
It seems like if you have
some form of divination,
it just makes it efficient
so we don't go into a pattern
of avoidance; because
overwhelm creates avoidance
for the most part, right?
>>PO: Right, exactly.
You can get into a
state of paralysis
where you don't do
anything at all.
And that's like --
there's two ways that...
people, the two most common ways
that people make bad decision
is either they're too emotional
or they're overly analytical.
Now the overly analytical types,
they'll just keep waiting
for more information.
And if there's a
window of opportunity --
and these windows of opportunity
change faster now, too.
>>RM: Right, they're opening
and closing while they're
still analyzing the data.
>>PO: Exactly, and so they'll
miss the window of opportunity
and then they need to start over
and get even more information.
So yeah, we have to strike
while the iron is hot.
>>RM: And as a result
of all that,
you say that divination is more
popular than it's ever been.
>>PO: Yeah, I think that's why.
I think it's because people
are looking for meaning
and they're looking for help in
this area of knowing what to do.
And part of it is that we're
moving from what's called
in astrology the Piscean Age
into the Aquarian Age, okay?
And so in the Piscean Age it was
all about devotion and about --
which supported hierarchy
because it really wasn't
about being intellectual.
It was more about
heartfelt devotion and...
>>RM: To something
exterior to you.
>>PO: Right, and so what you
believed was you basically were
told what to believe because
it didn't seem as important
as how you felt in
your devotional nature.
>>RM: That's changed.
>>PO: That's changing.
Now we're entering
the Age of Aquarius.
Aquarius is a more
intellectual sign.
It's dwelling in
the world of ideas,
and it's more equalitarian,
too, and more humanitarian.
So it's got a flatter
structure to everything whereas
in the last 2,000 years we've
had hierarchical structures
when it comes to church and
government and business;
and now we're seeing
this flattening thing.
And I like to think
that divination is a way
of flattening things on the
spiritual and religious front,
because it gives
you direct access.
You don't have to go
through the hierarchy
and be judged by
what you believe.
>>RM: Yes.
And on that note, we're going
to be discovering some more
about all of the
different systems.
I thank you for this, and we
will continue our conversation.
We're going to be continuing
by going deeper into the value
of each of the disciplines,
and it's up to us to discover
which one works best for us.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[ Music ]